Cognitive diagnosis, as a core component of educational assessment and personalized learning,aims to evaluate the learners’ mastery of specific knowledge concepts or skills by analyzing their learning 
behavior data.

However, existing cognitive diagnosis models still face challenges in utilizing the various heterogeneous information features of questions and capturing the patterns of cognitive state evolution over 
time. 

To address these issues, this paper proposes a cognitive diagnosis model based on heterogeneous information representation and temporal causal convolutional attention-based network (HIR-TCAN-CD). 

This model consists of three modules. 
(1)Specifically, the heterogeneous information representation module integrates multiple heterogeneous features of the questions; 
(2)the temporal causal convolutional attention module tracks the cognitive evolution process of the learners and innovatively introduces a masked causal attention mechanism to ensure that the diagnostic 
process is entirely based on historical sequences and is not interfered by future question information; 
(3)the prediction and diagnosis module uses multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to construct deep nonlinear interaction functions to predict the probability of the learners answering the target questions 
correctly.

Furthermore, we innovatively proposed the Logical Consistency Score (LCS) to verify the effectiveness of the masked attention mechanism.

Datasets  ----   https://github.com/tswsxk/EduData.git.
(1)ASSIST2010 is derived from the interactive data generated by the online tutoring platform developed by Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI). It covers basic mathematical knowledge from elementary to 
high school levels in the United States. In this experiment, the skill-builder version was used.
(2)Math2015 dataset comes from a large-scale mathematics ability assessment project for Chinese middle school learners. This dataset encompasses advanced mathematical knowledge concepts such as 
trigonometric functions and derivatives. The exercises design leans towards comprehensive ability assessment, with each question often involving multiple knowledge concepts.
(3)Junyi dataset is from the online learning platform Junyi Academy in Taiwan, China. This dataset records a large number of interaction logs of learners practicing math problems on this platform. It not 
only includes binary response data such as "right or wrong" but also provides rich questions and a hierarchical structure of knowledge concepts.

These experiments were completed on a 64-bit Ubuntu 24.04.3 LTS server, configured with a 4.70-GHz AMD Ryzen 7 9800X3D×16 CPU and a 32-GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5090 GPU, using the PyTorch framework for 
computation.
(Researchers who lack the necessary hardware environment can try to conduct their experiments using Colab. Website  ----  https://colab.research.google.com/#scrollTo=C4HZx7Gndbrh)
